Related: [[2.02 - The binomial theorem]] [[2.01 - Set notation]]
There is another way to think about the coefficients in binomial expansions that is particularly relevant to probability.
You can find the terms in the expansion of $(x + y)^{4}$ by looking at the expansion as the selection of possible products from $(x + y)(x + y)(x + y)(x + y)$.
In how many ways can you choose an $x$ from each bracket?
There is only 1 way: take an $4$ from each bracket.
Number the brackets from I to IV. To get a product of $x^{3}y$ you can take an $x$ from each of brackets I, II and III and a y from bracket 4. You can also get the $xs$ from I, II and IV, I, III and IV and I, II and IV so there are 4 lots of $x^{3}y$ and the second term is $4x^{3}y$.
What about terms in $(x + y)^{5}$ ?
Choose an x from each of two of the brackets $(x + y)(x + y)(x + y)(x + y)(x + y)$ to make $x^{2}y^{3}$ .
You can choose from brackets I and II, I and III, I and IV, I and V, II and III, II and IV, II and V, III and IV, III and V and last of all IV and V. This makes 10 lots altogether, so the term with $x^{2}$ is $10x^{2}y^{3}$ .
The numbers in Pascal’s triangle are also the numbers of ways of choosing r things from n things when the order doesn’t matter. A choice like this is called a combination. This is why the numbers are shown as $^{n}C_{r}$ as well as $\binom{n}{c}$ . The C stands for combination.

A combination is an un-ordered selection of some or all of the symbols from a group
The number of combinations of r objects from n distinct objects is given by
$\binom{n}{r}=^{n}C_{r}=\frac{n!}{r!(n-r)!}=\frac{n(n-1)(n-2)...(n-r+1)}{r!}$

Notice that there are 4 numbers on the top of $\binom{10}{4}$, starting from $10$ and going down, and the numbers on the bottom go from $1$ up to $4$, so you don’t really have to work out $n − r + 1$.
Rather than writing out the formula $\binom{n}{r}=^{n}C_{r}$ for large values of $r$, you should use its symmetry to change to a small number.
Many people prefer to use the $^{n}C_{r}$ notation when they are working out combinations, especially in probability calculations.