Related: [[5.02 - Two-way tables]] [[5.03 - Venn diagrams]]
In the early sixties, doctors and medical researchers concluded that smoking increased the chances of a person contracting lung cancer. At the time, cigarette companies strenuously denied that this was true, correctly stating that even overwhelming statistical evidence did not constitute proof. It was not until much later that a definite mechanism that linked smoking to cancer was found. However, the statistical evidence that showed a higher probability of cancer amongst smokers did drive the research that found the link.
How do you work out a probability of an event if the chances of it happening depend on whether something else occurs? How do you know if the probability of something happening is affected by something else? The mathematical answers to these questions are the subject of this chapter.
You have previously seen how tree diagrams are used to help define a sample space. They are also useful in situations where the occurrence of one event changes the sample space for another.
A tree diagram of a probability situation shows successive stages of a sample space as branching. It is usually convenient to combine branches with the same outcome and label the combined branch according to the number of possible outcomes. If there are 16 possible outcomes of a stage and 5 of them are the same, this combined branch is labelled as $\frac{5}{16}$ .

In Example 2, you could obtain the same result by multiplying the fractions on the branches to get the probabilities.
$P(GR) = \frac{3}{5}\times\frac{2}{4}=\frac{3}{10} × =$ and $P(RG) = \frac{2}{5}\times\frac{3}{4}=\frac{3}{10}$ , so
$P(different colours)=P(GR)+P(RG) =\frac{3}{10}+\frac{3}{10}=\frac{3}{5}$
You can add the probabilities because the GR and RG events are mutually exclusive.
This is always true for different paths on tree diagrams because they always show mutually exclusive events. This is a property of their construction.
You could also do Example 3 as a combination problem, in which case the probability would be $\frac{13\times^{4}C_{3}}{^{52}C_{3}}$ , which naturally gives the same answer. Tree diagrams are particularly useful when you can classify the possible outcomes into two or three types at each branch.
In some cases, such as rolling a fair die, the probability of obtaining the desired outcome is the same at each stage.