Related: [[5.01 - Tree diagrams]] [[5.03 - Venn diagrams]]

Two-way tables are used in calculating probabilities in sample spaces such as throwing two dice.
A two-way table has frequencies or elements of a sample space with two characteristics listed in rows and columns. One characteristic is listed across the columns and the other is listed down the rows. The other cells contain the frequency or element that has the characteristics shown in the corresponding row and column headings.

Two-way tables are often used with data to look for patterns indicating that the probability of one thing depends on another. In medical research data is often collected to determine if a particular indicator could influence other conditions. For example, data could be collected on age at death and BMI to find the extent to which high BMI influences morbidity.

When you are looking for relationships in two-way tables, it is common practice to find the totals of the columns and rows to simplify comparisons. You can also express the values as percentages. In this case there are three choices for the base of the percentages: the table total, the row totals or the column totals. The choice you make depends on what you are investigating.

In Example 6, you could also calculate the answer to part c using the percentages $(\frac{19.2}{40.8})$ . This gives a slightly different answer $(47.1\%)$, and is clearly a little less accurate because it is done after rounding to a percentage. The three different probabilities concerning white-collar women workers show how important it is to be clear about what you intend.