**Enheduanna**

1st author in world, daughter of Sargon of Akkad

Placed lots of trust in her.

Wrote poetry, paslms and prayers.

Had a major literarure legacy, and changed an entire culture.

She is the sky god, and came from akkad.

Wrote textss about gods for each city.

Effect on mesopotamia was major

**Gilgamesh**

**The Epic of Gilgamesh Summary**

Gilgamesh is the Priest-King of the city of Uruk. He is a tyrannical king who works his people to death and takes what he wants from them. He kills the young men at will and uses the women as he pleases. The people of Uruk cry out to the gods for help so that they can have peace. The gods hear them and instruct Anu, the goddess of creation, to make a twin for Gilgamesh, someone who is strong enough to stand up to him and who will ultimately save him. Anu makes Enkidu, a hairy wild man who lives in the wilderness with the animals. One day a trapper sees Enkidu by a water hole and is frightened. He tells his father of the wild man he saw. His father tells the trapper to go to see Gilgamesh. He tells his son to ask the king for a temple prostitute to bring back with him to seduce Enkidu. The trapper returns with Shamhat, a temple prostitute from the temple of Ishtar, the goddess of love and war. They wait for Enkidu to reappear by the watering hole. Enkidu returns and Shamhat reveals herself to him. They copulate for six days and seven nights. When Enkidu is satisfied, he finds that the animals no longer accept him. Shamhat tells him to come back with her to Uruk. Upon hearing of Gilgamesh, Enkidu decides he wishes to meet him. The two set out for Uruk, making a stop at a shepherd's camp. There Enkidu learns that Gilgamesh will sleep with a newly married bride on her wedding night, before her husband sleeps with her. He is outraged and decides he must stop Gilgamesh. Meanwhile, Gilgamesh has several dreams foretelling the arrival of Enkidu. The two meet in the streets of Uruk and a great fight breaks out between them. Gilgamesh is triumphant but his encounter with Enkidu changes him. They become companions. Enkidu tells Gilgamesh of Humbaba, a terrible monster who guards the Cedar Forest. Gilgamesh decides the two of them should journey there and defeat the monster. They make preparations and head to the Cedar Forest. They encounter Humbaba and with the help of Shamash, the sun god, defeat him. They return to Uruk carrying his head. After a celebration, Gilgamesh bathes himself and catches the eye of Ishtar. She tells him to become her lover, promising great riches and rewards in return. Gilgamesh rejects Ishtar, telling her he is aware of her reputation as a scornful lover. Ishtar is outraged and convinces her father, Anu, to release the Bull of Heaven to punish Gilgamesh. The Bull of Heaven descends on Uruk, killing hundreds of men. Enkidu seizes the animal and Gilgamesh kills it with a sword. Ishtar appears and threatens the heroes. Enkidu tears off one of the Bull's haunches and throws it at Ishtar. Later that night, Enkidu has a dream that the gods are meeting in council. The dream proves true. The gods decide that one of the heroes must die for their behavior. They choose Enkidu. Enkidu falls ill and suffers for twelve days before finally dying. Gilgamesh is shattered. He mourns for days and tears his hair and clothes. He adorns filthy animal skins and journeys into the forest and mountains. He has witnessed death and is now terrified of his own mortality. He seeks to escape it. Gilgamesh decides to seek out Utnapishtim, the one being granted immortality by the gods. He travels to Mount Mashu, a twin-peaked mountain that marks an entrance to a world in which mortals cannot venture. He convinces the guards of the mountain, two Scorpion-man beings, to allow him to enter a long passage under the mountain. He endures this terrible darkness for a full day. When he emerges on the other side, he is in a wondrous paradise. He sees a tavern by the sea and approaches it, frightening its owner, Siduri, with his appearance. Siduri allows him to enter the tavern after he explains his story and his intention to find Utnapishtim. Siduri tells Gilgamesh of Urshanabi, the boatman, who can ferry Gilgamesh across the Waters of Death to where Utnapishtim resides. Gilgamesh finds Urshanabi and the two set out to find Utnapishtim. They reach a shore and Gilgamesh meets an old man. Gilgamesh explains that he wishes to attain immortality. The old man is Utnapishtim, who tells Gilgamesh that immortality is for the gods alone. Mortals must learn to accept death. He tells Gilgamesh the story of how he was granted immortality by the gods. He asks Gilgamesh what he has done to deserve this same gift. Gilgamesh finally leaves with Urshanabi to return to Uruk. Utnapishtim tells Gilgamesh of a magical plant at the bottom of the sea that can restore one's youth. Gilgamesh descends into the waters and retrieves the plant. On his way back to Uruk, Gilgamesh stops to bathe in a spring, leaving the plant by the water. A serpent appears and steals the plant, leaving Gilgamesh weeping by the water's edge. He returns to Uruk with Urshanabi. Upon seeing the great city, Gilgamesh understands that it is his legacy, and that if he rules well, it will be his greatest legacy. Gilgamesh comes to understand that the most important thing in life is to have lived and loved well

**Enuma Eilish**

The story, one of the oldest, if not the oldest in the world, concerns the birth of the gods and the creation of the universe and human beings. In the beginning, there was only undifferentiated water swirling in chaos. Out of this swirl, the waters divided into sweet, fresh water, known as the god Apsu, and salty bitter water, the goddess Tiamat. Once differentiated, the union of these two entities gave birth to the younger gods.

These young gods, however, were extremely loud, troubling the sleep of Apsu at night and distracting him from his work by day. Upon the advice of his Vizier, Mummu, Apsu decides to kill the younger gods. Tiamat, hearing of their plan, warns her eldest son, Enki (sometimes Ea) and he puts Apsu to sleep and kills him. From Apsu's remains, Enki creates his home.

Tiamat, once the supporter of the younger gods, now is enraged that they have killed her mate. She consults with the god, Quingu, who advises her to make war on the younger gods. Tiamat rewards Quingu with the Tablets of Destiny, which legitimize the rule of a god and control the fates, and he wears them proudly as a breastplate. With Quingu as her champion, Tiamat summons the forces of chaos and creates eleven horrible monsters to destroy her children.

Ea, Enki, and the younger gods fight against Tiamat futilely until, from among them, emerges the champion Marduk who swears he will defeat Tiamat. Marduk defeats Quingu and kills Tiamat by shooting her with an arrow which splits her in two; from her eyes flow the waters of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. Out of Tiamat's corpse, Marduk creates the heavens and the earth, he appoints gods to various duties and binds Tiamat's eleven creatures to his feet as trophies (to much adulation from the other gods) before setting their images in his new home. He also takes the Tablets of Destiny from Quingu, thus legitimizing his reign.

After the gods have finished praising him for his great victory and the art of his creation, Marduk consults with the god Ea (the god of wisdom) and decides to create human beings from the remains of whichever of the gods instigated Tiamat to war. Quingu is charged as guilty and killed and, from his blood, Ea creates Lullu, the first man, to be a helper to the gods in their eternal task of maintaining order and keeping chaos at bay.

As the poem phrases it, "Ea created mankind/On whom he imposed the service of the gods, and set the gods free" (Tablet VI.33-34). Following this, Marduk "arranged the organization of the netherworld" and distributed the gods to their appointed stations (Tablet VI.43-46). The poem ends in Tablet VII with long praise of Marduk for his accomplishments.

**Atrahasis**

A long time ago when there were just the gods Anu ruled the sky, Enki ruled the seas and Enlil ruled the earth. The greater God's burdened the lesser gods with laborious tasks.They were forced to do heavy burdensome labor. The lesser gods were forced to dig the Tigris River and the Euphrates. They were ordered to heap up the mountains. Fed up with their work, the lesser gods set fire to their tools and demanded to see their foreman: Enlil. At night they surrounded Enlil's temple. The mob was halted by the gatekeeper who asked, "who declared war? Who has brought battle to Enlil?" The lower God's explained the pains of their burdens and labor. They sought reckoning with Enlil. The greater God's discussed the matter and a solution was proposed. The mother goddess would create humans in order to carry the burden of labour, freeing the lesser gods from their pain. The gods agreed and Enki made a plan. But in order to make humans one of the gods must be sacrificed. We-Ilu offered himself. His blood was mixed with clay. And after spitting on the clay the job was done. The mother goddess formed humans out of the clay. And now the humans would be burdened with the labor of the gods. At first the gods enjoyed their new leisure but as time passed and the population increased the humans grew large in number and became too noisy, greatly disturbing the gods. The racket disturbed Enlil so that he could not sleep. So to stop the noise he sent a drought to decimate the human population. And it didn't work. The humans repopulated and their commotion contined. Frustrated by the continuing noise Enlil sent a famine to kill the humans. And it didn't work. The humans repopulated and their

commotion continued. Finally Enlil had enough and he prepared to send a great flood to destroy the humans. Now among the humans Atrahasis was the wisest and most heroic. Enki went behind Enlil's back and appeared to Atrahasis in a vision, warning him of the incoming peril. He told him about the flood and ordered him to build a boat that would save his life. Atrahasis together with the elders

gathered materials and began construction the great vessel. He would take his family with him as well as many animals. Once on board he sealed the door shut. But Atrahasis was saddened because of the impending destruction Meanwhile above the skies Adad the storm God brought forth the mighty flood. And the deluge came down. There was such a great catastrophe that even the gods themselves were terrified. The deluge lasted seven days and seven nights. When the storm finally subsided the humans had all been wiped out. But the gods became hungry. There were no humans to offer them sacrifices, their farmers all wiped out. Their dismay turned to joy when they discovered Atrahasis had survived and he had offered sacrifices to the gods. Smelling the delicious food they came down to feast. However Enlil became furious at Enki for revealing his plan. But Enki shrewdly calmed him down explaining to Enlil that he was preserving life. The two made a pact to stop the humans becoming too noisy again they agreed to limit their number. They introduced death for all humans. They introduced infant mortality and made a third of women infertile. They also created priests and priestesses who would be celibate their whole lives. As for Atrahasis no one knows. The story ends there but some believe that he was carried away to paradise to live away from the new humans and thus ends the epic of Atrahasis.