Related: [[1.07 - Quadratic equations]]
- For most quadratics, completing the square is a tedious method. You can use the quadratic formula instead.
- For any quadratic equation $ax^2 + bx + c = 0$ where $a ≠ 0$, the solutions are given by $x=\frac{-b\pm\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}$
- The quadratic formula can be proved by completing the square for the general quadratic equation $ax^2 + bx + c = 0$. Your teacher might want you to do this as an exercise.
- You can obtain the solutions to any quadratic equation of the form $ax^2 + bx + c = 0$ where $a ≠ 0$ by using the quadratic formula. The expression $b^2 − 4ac$ is called the discriminant. You can use it to work out the number of solutions the equation has and whether any solutions are rational or irrational. Remember that rational numbers can be written in the form a b , where a and b are integers. Irrational numbers cannot. For example, $\sqrt{2}$, $\sqrt{11}$ and $\sqrt{20}$ are irrational. Written as decimals, rational numbers are terminating or recurring decimals, but irrational numbers do not terminate or recur.
- The expression $3x^2 − 6x − 8$ cannot be factorised so the equation $3x^2 − 6x − 8 = 0$ has irrational solutions. Using the quadratic formula, you get the solutions.
- $x=\frac{3+\sqrt{33}}{3}$ or $x=\frac{3-\sqrt{33}}{3}$. Notice that for this equation the discriminant is $(−6)2 − 4 × 3 × (−8)^2 = 132$, which is not a perfect square.
- The expression $3x^2 − 4x − 4$ can be factorised, so the equation $3x^2 − 4x − 4 = 0$ has rational solutions. From the formula, we get $x=\frac{4+\sqrt{64}}{6}$ or, $x=\frac{4-\sqrt{64}}{6}$ which gives $x = 2$ or $x = − \frac{2}{3}$ . Notice for this equation that the discriminant is $64$, which is a perfect square.
- The discriminant in the equation $16x^2 − 40x + 25 = 0$ is zero, so the equation has only one rational solution, $x = \frac{5}{4}$
- The discriminant of the equation $3x^2 − 9x + 8 = 0$ is $−15$. Using the formula gives you $x=\frac{9±\sqrt{-15}}{6}$
- There is no real number with a square of $−15$, so there are no real solutions to the equation.
- The number of solutions and types of solutions are determined by the value of the expression under the square root sign, $b^2 − 4ac$. The symbol for the discriminant is ∆.
- The discriminant for any quadratic equation $ax^2 + bx + c = 0$ is $∆ = b^2 − 4ac$.
	- For $∆ < 0$, there are no real solutions
	- For $∆ = 0$, there is only one real solution which is given by $x=- \frac{b}{2a}$. If the coefficients of the equation are rational, then this solution will be rational.
	- For $∆ > 0$, there are two real solutions. For equations with rational coefficients, the solutions are: 
		- rational if $∆$ is a perfect square, but 
		- irrational if $∆$ is not a perfect square.