$a(b+c) = ab + ac$ and $a$, $b$ & $c$ are real numbers
$(a+b)(c+d-e) = ac + ad + bc + bd - ae - be$

**every term**
Perfect squares
	$(a+b)^2 = a^2 - 2ab + b^2$
	$(a-b)^2 = a^2 - 2ab - b^2$
difference of two squares
	$(a+b)(a-b) = a^2 - b^2$
	$(5x+2y)(5x-2y)$
	$=(5x)^2 - (2y)^2$
	$=25x^2 - 4y^2$
$(x+a)(x+b) = x^2 + bx + ax + ab$

---
- Many of the algebraic techniques you encountered in junior mathematics will be used and applied in the topics of this course.
- The distributive law is used to expand single and multiple brackets. Terms may be collected to simplify the expression obtained. In the case of binomial products like (3x − 5)(x + 3), the FOIL shortcut may be used to save time.
- Some binomial products have special results 
	- Perfect squares $(a+b)^2 = a^2 + 2ab + b^2$
		- $(a-b)^2 = a^2-2ab+b^2$
- The distributive law states that a(b + c) = ab + ac for any real numbers a, b and c. **IMPORTANT FOIL method**
	-  First terms, Outer terms, Inner terms, Last terms
	-  $(a + b)(c + d) = ac + ad + bc + bd$
	- Perfect squares 
		- $(a + b)^{2}=a^{2}+2ab+b^{2}, (a−b)^{2}=a^{2}−2ab+b^{2}$
	- Difference of two squares 
		- $(a + b)(a − b) = a^2 − b^2$
- To multiply expressions with more than two terms you should use the distributive law, perhaps applying it several times
- Factorisation is the reverse of expanding brackets. It uses the distributive law in reverse. Always look for the highest common factor first. You place this outside the brackets, leaving the remaining factors of each term inside
- When operating on algebraic fractions you factorise where possible and remember to use the same rules as you would for numeric fractions.